[DX-615] Release Notes For Tyk GW + Dashboard (#3174)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-dashboard/release-notes/version-5.2.md

- **TT-9365:** Fixed an issue where the _enforced timeout_ configuration parameter of an API endpoint accepted negative values, without displaying validation errors. With this fix, users receive clear feedback and prevent unintended configurations.

- **TT-8526:** Fixed an issue with UDG queries containing array parameters. UDG no longer drops these parameters from the final request URL sent upstream.

- **TT-9747:** Fixed an issue in Tyk Dashboard where duplicate API names and listen paths could be created. Configurations are now as unique as they should be.

- **TT-7550:** Fixed an issue with introspecting GraphQL schemas that previously raised an error when dealing with custom root types other than _Query_, _Mutation_, or _Subscription_.

### Community Contributions

Special thanks to the following members of the Tyk community for their contributions in this release:

**Example**

Thanks to PatrickTaibel for fixing an issue where global_size_limit was not enabling request size limit middleware.

> ### Breaking Changes

Reviewer: maybe we can put it at the top?

Author: Done

## Support Lifetime

Full support for this release ends on May 2024. Extended support ends on May 2025.

## Downloads

Tyk Dashboard 5.2 - [docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/layers/tykio/tyk-dashboard/v5.2.0/images/sha256-075df4d840b452bfe2aa9bad8f1c1b7ad4ee06a7f5b09d3669f866985b8e2600?tab=vulnerabilities)

## Upgrading Tyk

Please refer to the [upgrading Tyk]({{< ref "/upgrading-tyk" >}}) page for further guidance with respect to upgrade strategy.

## Changelog

### Added

- Added a new endpoint, _/system/stats_, to provide API insights and operations statistics. These statistics include _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations. This feature equips managers to proactively inform customers about plan updates, while the endpoint's customisable data display and flexible date filtering options, offer comprehensive insights into usage trends and management activities.

> - Added enhanced Gateway usage reporting. Tyk Dashboard now offers expanded usage reporting, giving customers valuable insights into their _hybrid_ and _standard_ Gateways. With this addition, users can efficiently monitor deployed gateways and track monthly maximum Gateway usage.

Author: Thanks @andyo-tyk have moved those items down in the added section

# Tyk Dashboard (Licensed) 5.2 Release Notes

### Breaking Changes

This release has no breaking changes.

## Release Highlights

We're thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience of Tyk Dashboard.

**PMs summary paragraph is included here**

## Support Lifetime

Full support for this release ends on May 2024. Extended support ends on May 2025.

## Downloads

Tyk Dashboard 5.2 - [docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/layers/tykio/tyk-dashboard/v5.2.0/images/sha256-075df4d840b452bfe2aa9bad8f1c1b7ad4ee06a7f5b09d3669f866985b8e2600?tab=vulnerabilities)

## Upgrading Tyk

Please refer to the [upgrading Tyk]({{< ref "/upgrading-tyk" >}}) page for further guidance with respect to upgrade strategy.

## Changelog

### Added

> - Added a new endpoint, _/system/stats_, to provide API insights and operations statistics. These statistics include _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations. This feature equips managers to proactively inform customers about plan updates, while the endpoint's customisable data display and flexible date filtering options, offer comprehensive insights into usage trends and management activities.

Author: @andyo-tyk This one was derived from https://tyktech.atlassian.net/browse/TT-9607

> - Added a new endpoint, _/system/stats_, to provide API insights and operations statistics. These statistics include _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations. This feature equips managers to proactively inform customers about plan updates, while the endpoint's customisable data display and flexible date filtering options, offer comprehensive insights into usage trends and management activities.

Author: Done

> - Added enhanced usage reporting. Tyk Dashboard now offers expanded usage reporting, giving customers valuable insights into their _hybrid_ and _standard_ Gateways. With this addition, users can efficiently monitor deployed gateways, their versions and track monthly maximum Gateway usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added enhanced Gateway usage reporting. Tyk Dashboard now offers expanded usage reporting, giving customers valuable insights into their _hybrid_ and _standard_ Gateways. With this addition, users can efficiently monitor deployed gateways and track monthly maximum Gateway usage.
```

> - Added support for historical API insights. This is a useful feature for account managers, providing a historical record of the total number of APIs and active APIs. License compliance can be effectively monitored, enabling a clearer understanding of client usage patterns over time.

Author: Thanks @andyo-tyk I have removed it from the release notes

> - Added support for API developers to easily configure both request and response body transformations for more precise data management. Define input data, craft transformation templates and test them against specific inputs for reliable customization.

Author: Ok thanks for spotting that Andy, so this should go in Update/Changed section, yes?

> - Added support for API developers to easily configure both request and response body transformations for more precise data management. Define input data, craft transformation templates and test them against specific inputs for reliable customization.

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest it goes in Added because, for Tyk OAS, it's a new capability.

> - Added support for API developers to easily configure both request and response body transformations for more precise data management. Define input data, craft transformation templates and test them against specific inputs for reliable customization.

Author: Thanks @andyo-tyk, I have updated changelog description in Dashboard release note to mention that this relates to Tyk OAS

> - Adding a new data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is pre-filled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being the name of any GraphQL type.

Author: @andyo-tyk @agata-wit 

Something like:

```suggestion
- Adding a new UDG data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is pre-filled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being the name of any GraphQL type.
```

or

```suggestion
- Adding a new data source is simpler when working with UDG. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is pre-filled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being the name of any GraphQL type.
```

or something else...

> - Adding a new data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is pre-filled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being the name of any GraphQL type.

Reviewer 4: I like the second one! Vote for that :)

> - Adding a new data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is prefilled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being _Query_, _Mutation_ _or_ _Subscription_.

Author: Many thanks @agata-wit

Would this be ok?

```suggestion
- Adding a new data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is pre-filled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being the name of any GraphQL type.
```

> - Adding a new data source is simpler. The default value for the data source name is pre-filled, saving time. The data source name is prefilled in the format _fieldName_typeName_, with _typeName_ being _Query_, _Mutation_ _or_ _Subscription_.

Reviewer 4: Yup, that would be fine.

### Changed

- Updated the API creation process in Tyk Dashboard so that users remain on the same screen after saving. This means users can continue editing without having to navigate back to the screen to make subsequent changes.

- Updated the screen for configuring and saving UDG data sources. The _Save_ button has been replaced with _Save & Update API_ button and users no longer need to additionally click _Update_ at the top of the screen to persist changes. Saving a UDG data source is now simpler and quicker.

- Update the Dashboard with enhanced API usage monitoring. Users now benefit from an insightful chart on the _Licensing Statistics_ page, detailing: maximum, minimum, average API counts, in addition to active API counts. Flexible date filtering, license limit reference lines and the ability to toggle between line and bar graphs empowers users to monitor usage effortlessly, ensuring license adherence.

> - Update the Dashboard with enhanced API usage visibility. A new chart has been introduced on the _License Statistics_ page, presenting the number of deployed _Data Planes_. This addition enables users to easily monitor their _Data Plane_ usage and demonstrate compliance to contract limits.

Author: Not sure on this one. My feeling is if we combined it into one paragraph it might be too lengthy. If we reduced the description to combine both bullet points we might lose some of the benefits in the description.

### Fixed

> - Fixed an issue where _advanced_cache_config_ data was absent in the _Raw Editor_. This fix now ensures visibility of this data. Furthermore, API modifications in the _Designer_ no longer lead to data loss, safeguarding cache configuration consistency. The UI now offers a clear view of advanced cache settings, including Timeout and Cache response codes fields.

Author: Something like....

```suggestion
- Fixed an issue where `advanced_cache_config` data was absent in the _Raw Editor_. This fix now ensures that `advanced_cache_config` can be configured. Furthermore, API modifications in the _Designer_ no longer lead to data loss, safeguarding cache configuration consistency. The UI now offers a clear view of advanced cache settings, including the new Timeout field and Cache response codes fields.
```

> - Fixed an issue where _advanced_cache_config_ data was absent in the _Raw Editor_. This fix now ensures visibility of this data. Furthermore, API modifications in the _Designer_ no longer lead to data loss, safeguarding cache configuration consistency. The UI now offers a clear view of advanced cache settings, including Timeout and Cache response codes fields.

Author: Thanks @andyo-tyk I have updated to use _code_ styling for consistency with other changelog items. I have pushed the change and made it clearer that the fix makes it possible to configure this part of the API

- Fixed an issue with JWT claim names containing spaces. Previously 403 errors were raised when using tokens containing such claims.

- Fixed an issue where _popular endpoints_ data was not displayed in Tyk Dasboard with SQL aggregated analytics enabled. Users can now view _popular endpoints_ when viewing _Traffic Activity_ per API or filtering by API with SQL aggregated analytics enabled.

- Fixed a potential security vulnerability where static and dynamic mTLS requests,with expired certificates, could be proxied upstream.

- Fixed an issue in the _API Activity_ dashboard where users were unable to view request analytics for a specific date. Subsequently, users can now make informed decisions based on access to this data. 

- Fixed an issue where the _enforced timeout_ configuration parameter of an API endpoint accepted negative values, without displaying validation errors. With this fix, users receive clear feedback and prevent unintended configurations.

> - Fixed an issue in Tyk Dashboard where duplicate API names and listen paths could be created. Configurations are now unique.

Author: @andyo-tyk This one is https://tyktech.atlassian.net/browse/TT-9747

> - Fixed an issue in Tyk Dashboard where duplicate API names and listen paths could be created. Configurations are now unique.

Reviewer 3: Ah, OK - the expected/reported behaviour in the ticket didn't make sense. :-)

For clarity perhaps:

```suggestion
- Fixed an issue in Tyk Dashboard where duplicate APIs could be created with the same names and listen paths if you clicked multiple times on the _save_ button in the API Designer. Now, when you save your new API, you are taken to the list of APIs.
```

- Fixed a critical issue in MDCB deployments, relating to _Control Plane_ stability. The _Control Plane_ Gateway was found to crash with a panic when creating a Tyk OAS API. The bug has been addressed, ensuring stability and reliability in such deployments.

- Fixed an issue with _MongoDB_ connection strings. To ensure consistent compatibility with both _mgo_ and _mongo-go_ drivers, users should now utilise URL-encoded values within the _MongoDB_ connection string's username and password fields when they contain characters like "?", "@". This resolves the need for different handling across _MongoDB_ drivers.

### Community Contributions

Special thanks to the following members of the Tyk community for their contributions in this release:

**Example**

> Thanks to PatrickTaibel for fixing an issue where global_size_limit was not enabling request size limit middleware.

Author: Ok, thanks @andyo-tyk I have removed the community contribution section from Dashboard release notes

> # Tyk Dashboard (Licensed) 5.2 Release Notes

Reviewer: I think we should remove `(licensed)` from the title. We can move it to a line below with body font size.

Author: done

### Breaking Changes

This release has no breaking changes.

## Release Highlights

We're thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience of Tyk Dashboard.

> ### Track Usage Of License APIs, Gateways And Distributed Data Planes Over Time

Reviewer: @dcs3spp when I look at the preview i don't see much difference between H2 and H3, they seem on the same level. What do you think?

Author: Thanks @letzya I have updated headings so uses H2 and H4 to make the headings different.

> ### Track Usage Of License APIs, Gateways And Distributed Data Planes Over Time

Reviewer 3: This should be the last item in the list of Highlights - the other two are more interesting for users.

Author: Thanks @andyo-tyk I have moved it to end of release highlights section for dashboard

# Tyk Dashboard 5.2 Release Notes

**Licensed**

## Breaking Changes

This release has no breaking changes.

## Release Highlights

We're thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience with Tyk Dashboard. For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog]({{< ref "#changelog">}}) below.

#### Configure Caching For Each API Endpoint

We’ve added the ability to [configure]({{< ref "/basic-config-and-security/reduce-latency/caching/advanced-cache#advanced-caching-by-endpoint" >}}) per-endpoint timeouts for Tyk’s response cache, giving you increased flexibility to tailor your APIs to your upstream services. While doing this, we’ve also fixed a longstanding issue within the *Tyk Dashboard* so that you can configure more of the [advanced caching]({{< ref "/basic-config-and-security/reduce-latency/caching/advanced-cache#configuring-endpoint-caching-in-the-dashboard" >}}) options from within the UI.

> #### Added Body Transform Middleware to Tyk OAS API Definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Added Body Transform Middleware to Tyk OAS API Definition
```

> #### Added Configurable Middleware For Body Transformations For Tyk OAS APIs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Added Body Transform Middleware to Tyk OAS API definitions
```

# Tyk Dashboard 5.2 Release Notes

**Licensed**

## Breaking Changes

This release has no breaking changes.

## Release Highlights

> We're thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience of Tyk Dashboard.

Reviewer: can we add another sentence like in the gw? `We’re thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience with Tyk Gateway. For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](...)below.`

Author: Done

#### Configure Caching For Each API Endpoint

We’ve added the ability to configure per-endpoint timeouts for Tyk’s response cache, giving you increased flexibility to tailor your APIs to your upstream services. While doing this, we’ve also fixed a longstanding issue within the _Tyk Dashboard_ so that you can configure more of the advanced caching options from within the UI.

> #### Added Configurable Middleware For Body Transformations For Tyk OAS APIs

Reviewer: using "tyk oas apis" could be confusing since we have official tyk oas apis...can we add the term "api definition"? @dcs3spp @andyo-tyk

Reviewer 3: No, the term Tyk OAS API is used to differentiate from Tyk Classic API.

The "official Tyk OAS APIs" that you mention are, I think, the Swagger/OAS documentation of the Tyk Dashboard API and Tyk Gateway API? I think we need to change this term, rather than the one we are using in the product to describe client APIs.

Reviewer: we can't, it's an industry standard.

Reviewer 3: Sorry? I disagree.

It's not an industry standard to describe the OAS documents thart describe the Tyk Gateway API and Tyk Dashboard API as "Tyk OAS APIs". It's up to Tyk how we describe our product's API...

I've suggested before that it's confusing to describe the Tyk Gateway API and Tyk Dashboard API as "Tyk API", given that Tyk is an API management platform so there's a lot of use of the abbreviation "API".

I strongly recommend consistently using the full names for these management APIs to avoid any risk of them being confused with client APIs that are managed with the Dashboard/Gateway - which we now have two different ways of describing: via ther Tyk Classic API definition and the Tyk OAS API definition.

Reviewer: MAybe I misunderstood but you just added the word "definition" -  `Tyk Classic API definition` and `Tyk OAS API definition` which is what I suggested. Can we add it to the PR?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps make the change in the following paragraph?

"With this release we are adding the much requested _Body Transformations_ to the _Tyk OAS API Definition_."

Author: When reading this heading
@andyo-tyk @letzya 

_#### Added Configurable Middleware For Body Transformations For Tyk OAS APIs_

it could be perceived by a new Tyk user that it could be performing a body transformation of a Tyk OAS schema.

How about having the title as:

_#### Added Configurable Middleware For Body Transformations For APIs managed by Tyk Gateway_

Reviewer 5: That won't work. We need to specify that this is related to our OAS APIs support. The following would though

#### Added Body Transformations Middleware  For Tyk managed OAS APIs

Author: Or @letzya @zalbiraw @andyo-tyk 

```suggestion
#### Added Configurable Middleware For Body Transformations For OAS APIs managed by Tyk Gateway
```

Reviewer 5: Reads well to me

Reviewer 3: No, I'm sorry, but we are consistently using the term Tyk OAS API for an API that is composed of an OAS Document and the Tyk vendor specific config in x-tyk-api-gateway.

The ONLY way that I want us to refer to such APIs is as Tyk OAS APIs and, similarly, for any that use Tyk's traditional vendor-specific API definition, we refer to these as Tyk Classic APIs.

There is a clear distinction between:
API - Application Programming Interface - the endpoints that are exposed by a system/service
OAS - Open API Specification - an open standard way to describe the vendor-agnostic aspects of a service (i.e. an API)
OpenAPI Document - a JSON or YAML file containing an OAS-compliant description of an API
API Definition - the description of an API that can be processed by Tyk and used to configure the Tyk Gateway to proxy and manage requests to an upstream service
Tyk Classic API definition - Tyk's vendor specific API definition
Tyk OAS API definition - an API definition consisting of a combination of an OpenAPI Document and Tyk vendor specific elements
Tyk Classic API - an instance, on Tyk Dashboard/Gateway, of an API configured via a Tyk Classic API definition
Tyk OAS API - an instance, on Tyk Dashboard/Gateway, of an API configured via a Tyk OAS API definition

Tyk components are designed with their own management APIs (see definition above):
Tyk Gateway API
Tyk Dashboard API

We have OAS-compliant definitions of both of these APIs, which should correctly be termed:
Tyk Gateway API OAS Document
Tyk Dashboard API OAS Document

We cannot say "OAS APIs managed by Tyk"

> With this release we are adding the much requested _Body Transformations_ to _Tyk OAS_. You can now configure middleware for both request and response body transformations and - as a _Tyk Dashboard_ user - you’ll be able to do so from within our simple and elegant API Designer tool. Visually test and preview _Body Transformations_ from within the API Designer.

Reviewer: We need a link to that new doc

Author: Done

# Tyk Dashboard 5.2 Release Notes

### Breaking Changes

This release has no breaking changes.

## Release Highlights

We're thrilled to bring you some exciting enhancements and crucial fixes to improve your experience of Tyk Dashboard.

**PMs summary paragraph is included here**

## Support Lifetime

Full support for this release ends on May 2024. Extended support ends on May 2025.

## Downloads

Tyk Dashboard 5.2 - [docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/layers/tykio/tyk-dashboard/v5.2.0/images/sha256-075df4d840b452bfe2aa9bad8f1c1b7ad4ee06a7f5b09d3669f866985b8e2600?tab=vulnerabilities)

## Changelog

### Added

> - Added a new endpoint, _/system/stats_, to provide API insights and operations statistics. These statistics include _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations. This feature equips managers to proactively inform customers about plan updates, while the endpoint's customisable data display and flexible date filtering options, offer comprehensive insights into usage trends and management activities.

Author: Done

- Added a new endpoint, _/system/stats_, to provide insight and operational statistics on total and active APIs deployed. The endpoint's flexible date filtering options, equip users to obtain comprehensive insights into usage trends.

#### Changed

- Improved the flow when creating an API within the API Designer so that you remain on the same screen after saving. This means you can continue editing without having to navigate back to the screen to make subsequent changes.

- Updated the screen for configuring and saving UDG data sources. The _Save_ button has been replaced with _Save & Update API_ button and users no longer need to additionally click _Update_ at the top of the screen to persist changes. Saving a UDG data source is now simpler and quicker.

- Updated the Dashboard with enhanced API usage monitoring. Users now benefit from an insightful chart on the _Licensing Statistics_ page, detailing: maximum, minimum and average counts of created and active APIs. Flexible date filtering, license limit reference lines and the ability to toggle between line and bar graphs empowers users to monitor usage effortlessly, ensuring license adherence.

> - A new chart has been introduced on the _License Statistics_ page that presents the number of deployed _Data Planes_. This addition enables users to easily monitor their _Data Plane_ usage and  nearness to their contract limits.

Author: Thanks @caroltyk I have removed one of the duplicates

- Fixed an issue where _popular endpoints_ data was not displayed in Tyk Dasboard with SQL aggregated analytics enabled. Users can now view _popular endpoints_ when viewing _Traffic Activity_ per API or filtering by API with SQL aggregated analytics enabled.

- Fixed a potential security vulnerability where static or dynamic mTLS requests with expired certificates could be proxied upstream.

- Fixed an issue in where duplicate API names and listen paths could be created. Configurations are now unique.

- Fixed an issue in the _API Activity_ dashboard where users were unable to view request analytics for a specific date. Subsequently, users can now make informed decisions based on access to this data. 

- Fixed an issue where the _enforced timeout_ configuration parameter of an API endpoint accepted negative values, without displaying validation errors. With this fix, users receive clear feedback and prevent unintended configurations.

- Fixed an issue in Tyk Dashboard where duplicate APIs could be created with the same names and listen paths if you clicked multiple times on the _save_ button in the API Designer. Now, when you save your new API, you are taken to the list of APIs.

> - Fixed a critical issue in MDCB deployments, relating to _Control Plane_ stability. The _Control Plane_ Gateway was found to crash with a panic when creating a Tyk OAS API. The bug has been addressed, ensuring stability and reliability in such deployments.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @dcs3spp for moving this to gateway. Could you review the wording changes too?

> - Fixed a critical issue in MDCB deployments, relating to _Control Plane_ stability. The _Control Plane_ Gateway was found to crash with a panic when creating a Tyk OAS API. The bug has been addressed, ensuring stability and reliability in such deployments.

Author: Many thanks @caroltyk, I have updated the wording changes also.
